---
title: Cryptographic Algorithms and Key Sizes for Personal Identity Verification (Working Draft)
exports:
  - format: tex
    template: ../
authors:
  - name: Andrew Regenscheid
    orcid: 0000-0002-3930-527X
    affiliation: CSD
  - name : Hildegard Ferraiolo
    orcid: 0000-0002-7719-5999
    affiliation: CSD
affiliations:
  - id: CSD
    institution: "National Institute of Standards and Technology"
    department: "Computer Security Division, Information Technology Lab"
    city: "Gaithersburg"
    state: "MD"
    country: "USA"
short_title: 800-78- Cryptographic Algorithms and Key Sizes for PIV
subtitle: Development Version for PQC
#doi: 10.6028/NIST.SP.800-78-5
options:
  publication_identifier: NIST SP 800-78-6
  publication_number: 800-78-6
keywords:
  - cryptographic algorithm
  - FIPS 201
  - identity credential
  - Personal Identity Verification
  - PIV 
  - smart cards
numbering:
  title: false
  headings: true
bibliography:
  - refs.bib
  - references.bib
---

+++ {"part": "abstract"}

Federal Information Processing Standard 201-3 (FIPS 201-3) defines the requirements for Personal Identity Verification (PIV) life cycle activities, including identity proofing, registration, PIV Card issuance, and PIV Card usage. FIPS 201-3 also defines the structure of an identity credential that includes cryptographic keys. This document contains the technical specifications needed for the mandatory and optional cryptographic keys specified in FIPS 201-3, as well as the supporting infrastructure specified in FIPS 201-3 and the related NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-73, Interfaces for Personal Identity Verification, and SP 800-76, Biometric Specifications for Personal Identity Verification, which rely on cryptographic functions.

+++

:::{important} Working Draft
This page contains a working draft of SP 800-78-6, *Cryptographic Algorithms and Key Sizes for Personal Identity Verification,* as it is being updated to support post-quantum cryptography. The current, final version of this publication, SP 800-78-5, is available [here](https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-78-5).   
:::

(sec-intro)=
## Introduction

Homeland Security Presidential Directive-12 (HSPD-12) mandated the creation of new standards for interoperable identity credentials for physical and logical access to Federal
Government locations and systems. Federal Information Processing Standard 201 (FIPS 201), Personal Identity Verification (PIV) of Federal Employees and Contractors, was developed to establish standards for identity credentials [@FIPS201]. This document, NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-78-5, specifies the cryptographic algorithms and key sizes for PIV systems and is a companion document to FIPS 201-3.

(sec-scope)=
### Scope

The scope of this recommendation encompasses the PIV Card, infrastructure components that
support issuance and management of the PIV Card, and applications that rely on the credentials
supported by the PIV Card to provide security services. This recommendation identifies
acceptable symmetric and asymmetric encryption algorithms, digital signature algorithms, key
establishment schemes, and message digest algorithms and specifies mechanisms to identify
the algorithms associated with PIV keys or digital signatures.

Algorithms and key sizes have been selected for consistency with applicable federal standards
and to ensure adequate cryptographic strength for PIV applications.

(sec-audience)=
### Audience and Assumptions

This document is intended for federal agencies and implementers of PIV systems. Readers are
assumed to have a working knowledge of cryptography and public key infrastructure (PKI)
technology.

### Document Overview

The document is organized as follows:

- [](#sec-intro), Introduction, provides the purpose, scope, audience, and assumptions of the document and outlines its structure
- [](#sec-application-of-crypto), Application of Cryptography in FIPS 201-3, identifies the cryptographic mechanisms and objects that employ cryptography, as specified in FIPS 201-3 and its supporting documents.
- [](#sec-oncard-req), On-Card Cryptographic Requirements, describes the cryptographic requirements for cryptographic keys and authentication information stored on the PIV Card.
- [](#sec-cert-status), Certificate Status Information, describes the cryptographic requirements for status information generated by PKI certification authorities (CA) and Online Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP) responders.
- [](#sec-piv-card-admin-keys), PIV Card Application Administration Keys, describes the cryptographic requirements for managing information stored on the PIV Card.
- [](#sec-identifiers-interfaces), Identifiers for PIV Card Interfaces, specifies key reference values and algorithm identifiers for the application programming interface and card commands defined in [@SP800-73].
- [](#sec-cavp-req), Cryptographic Algorithm Validation Testing Requirements, specifies the cryptographic algorithm validation testing that must be performed on the PIV Card based on the keys and algorithms that it supports. 
- The [References](#sec-refs) contains the list of documents used as references in this recommendation.
- [Appendix %s](#sec-abbreviations), List of Symbols, Abbreviations, and Acronyms, contains the list of acronyms used in this document.
- [Appendix %s](#sec-changelog), Change Log, describes the changes made to SP 800-78 since its initial release. 

(sec-application-of-crypto)=
## Application of Cryptography in FIPS 201-3

FIPS 201-3 employs cryptographic mechanisms to authenticate cardholders, secure information
stored on the PIV Card, and secure the supporting infrastructure. FIPS 201-3 and its supporting
documents specify a suite of keys to be stored on the PIV Card for personal identity verification,
digital signature generation, and key management. The PIV cryptographic keys specified in FIPS
201-3 and SP 800-73 are:

- The asymmetric PIV Authentication key,
- An asymmetric Card Authentication key,
- A symmetric Card Authentication key (deprecated),
- An asymmetric digital signature key for signing documents and messages,
- An asymmetric key management key that supports key establishment or key transport and up to 20 retired key management keys,
- A symmetric PIV Card Application Administration Key, and
- An asymmetric PIV Secure Messaging key that supports the establishment of session keys for use with secure messaging and cardholder authentication using the SM-AUTH authentication mechanism as defined in [@SP800-73].

The cryptographic algorithms, key sizes, and parameters that may be used for these keys are specified in [](#sec-piv-keys). PIV Cards must implement private key computations for one or more of the algorithms identified in this section.

Cryptographically protected objects specified in FIPS 201-3, SP 800-73, and SP 800-76 include:

- The X.509 certificates for each asymmetric key on the PIV Card, except for the PIV Secure Messaging key,
- A secure messaging card verifiable certificate (CVC) for the PIV Secure Messaging key,
- An Intermediate CVC for the public key needed to verify the signature on the secure messaging CVC,
- A digitally signed Card Holder Unique Identifier (CHUID),
- Digitally signed biometrics using the Common Biometric Exchange Formats Framework (CBEFF) signature block, and
- The SP 800-73 Security Object, which is a digitally signed hash table.
  
[](#sec-auth-information-card) specifies the cryptographic algorithms, key sizes, and parameters that may be used to protect these objects. Certification authorities (CA) and card management systems that protect these objects must support one or more of the cryptographic algorithms, key sizes, and parameters specified in [](#sec-auth-information-card).

Applications may be designed to use any or all of the cryptographic keys and objects stored on the PIV Card. Where maximum interoperability is required, applications should support all of the identified algorithms, key sizes, and parameters specified in [](#sec-piv-keys) and [](#sec-auth-information-card).

FIPS 201-3 requires CAs and Online Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP) responders to generate and distribute digitally signed certificate revocation lists (CRL) and OCSP status messages, respectively. These certificate status mechanisms support validation of the PIV Card, the PIV cardholder, the cardholder’s digital signature key, and the cardholder’s key management key.

The signed certificate status mechanisms specified in FIPS 201-3 are:

- X.509 CRLs that specify the status of a group of X.509 certificates and
- OCSP status response messages that specify the status of a particular X.509 certificate.

The cryptographic algorithms, key sizes, and parameters that may be used to sign these mechanisms are specified in [](#sec-cert-status), which also describes rules for encoding the signatures to ensure interoperability.

FIPS 201-3 permits optional card management operations. These operations may only be performed after the PIV Card authenticates the card management system. Card management systems are authenticated through the use of PIV Card Application Administration Keys. The cryptographic algorithms and key sizes that may be used for these keys are specified in [](#sec-piv-card-admin-keys).

(sec-oncard-req)=
## On-Card Cryptographic Requirements
FIPS 201-3 identifies a suite of objects that are stored on the PIV Card for use in authentication mechanisms or other security protocols. These objects may be divided into three classes: cryptographic keys, signed authentication information stored on the PIV Card, and message digests of information stored on the PIV Card. Cryptographic requirements for PIV keys are detailed in [](#sec-piv-keys). Cryptographic requirements for other stored objects are detailed in [](#sec-auth-information-card).

(sec-piv-keys)=
### PIV Cryptographic Keys

FIPS 201-3 and SP 800-73 specify six types of cryptographic keys to be used as credentials by the PIV cardholder:
1. The mandatory PIV Authentication key,
2. The mandatory asymmetric Card Authentication key,
3. An optional symmetric Card Authentication key (deprecated),
4. A conditionally mandatory digital signature key,
5. A conditionally mandatory key management key,[^mandatorykeys] and
6. An optional asymmetric key to establish session keys for secure messaging and to authenticate the cardholder using the SM-AUTH authentication mechanism.

All cryptographic algorithms employed shall provide at least 112 bits of security strength. Cryptographic keys that will remain in use after 2030 should provide 128 bits of security strength.[^2030strength] Federal departments and agencies should consider potential cryptographic key length migrations as part of their moderate to long-term cryptographic transition and modernization plans, including the need to plan and invest for a future migration to post-quantum algorithms. Capital investments for PIV issuance and relying party systems should be selected with an emphasis on ensuring a timely migration to post-quantum algorithms once standards, technologies, and services are available. If a migration to longer cryptographic keys would require significant resources or infrastructure upgrades, federal departments and agencies may elect to defer these improvements until the post-quantum migration. Post-quantum algorithms will be specified in a future revision of this document once foundational standards supporting their use have been adopted.

[^mandatorykeys]: The digital signature and key management keys are mandatory if the cardholder has a government-issued email account at the time of credential issuance.

[^2030strength]: For detailed guidance on the strength of cryptographic algorithms, see NIST SP 800-57, Recommendation on Key Management – Part 1: General [@SP800-57-1].

[](#table-piv-algorithms) establishes specific requirements for cryptographic algorithms and key sizes for each key type.

:::{aside} PQC: Algorithm Requirements
This table must be updated to include ML-DSA for signature key types and ML-KEM for key management and secure messaging key types.
:::

:::{table} Algorithm and key size requirements for PIV key types
:label: table-piv-algorithms
:align: center

| PIV Key Type | Algorithms and Key Sizes Through 2030 | Algorithm and Key Sizes for 2031 and Beyond  |
| ---------------------------- | ------------------------------------- | ---------------------------- |
| **PIV Authentication key**   | RSA (2048 or 3072 bits)               | RSA 3072 bits                |
|                              | ECDSA (Curve P-256 or P-384)          | ECDSA (Curve P-256 or P-384) |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| **Asymmetric Card Authentication key** | RSA (2048 or 3072 bits)     | RSA 3072 bits                |
|                              | ECDSA (Curve P-256 or P-384)          | ECDSA (Curve P-256 or P-384) |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| **Symmetric Card Authentication key (deprecated)** | 3TDEA (deprecated) | —                         |
|                              | AES-128, AES-192, or AES-256          | AES-128, AES-192, or AES-256 |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| **Digital signature key**    | RSA (2048 or 3072 bits)               | RSA 3072 bits                |
|                              | ECDSA (Curve P-256 or P-384)          | ECDSA (Curve P-256 or P-384) |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| **Key management key**       | RSA key transport (2048 or 3072 bits) | RSA key transport 3072       |
|                              | ECDH (Curve P-256 or P-384)           | ECDH (Curve P-256 or P-384)  |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| **PIV Secure Messaging key** | ECDH (Curve P-256 or P-384)           | ECDH (Curve P-256 or P-384)  |

:::

In addition to the key sizes, keys must be generated using secure parameters. Rivest-Shamir-Adleman (RSA) keys must be generated using a public exponent of 65537. Elliptic curve keys must correspond to one of the following recommended curves from [@FIPS186]:

- Curve P-256 or
- Curve P-384.

Elliptic curve keys are a faster option than RSA-based keys for the Card Authentication key for physical access since elliptic curve private key computation time is significantly shorter than RSA-based private key computation time. There is no phaseout date specified for either curve.

If the PIV Card Application supports the virtual contact interface [@SP800-73] and the digital signature key, the key management key, or any of the retired key management keys are elliptic curve keys that correspond to Curve P-384, then the PIV Secure Messaging key shall use P-384. Otherwise, it may use P-256 or P-384.

While this specification requires that the RSA public exponent associated with PIV keys be 65537, applications should be able to process RSA public keys that have any public exponent that is an odd positive integer greater than or equal to 65537 and less than 2256.

This specification requires the key management key to be an RSA key transport key or an Elliptic Curve Diffie-Hellman (ECDH) key. The specifications for RSA key transport are [@PKCS1] and [@SP800-56B], and the specification for ECDH key agreement is [@SP800-56A].

(sec-auth-information-card)=
### Authentication Information Stored on the PIV Card

#### Specification of Digital Signatures on Authentication Information

FIPS 201-3 requires the use of digital signatures to protect the integrity and authenticity of information stored on the PIV Card. FIPS 201-3 and SP 800-73 require digital signatures on the following objects stored on the PIV Card:

- X.509 public key certificates,
- The optional secure messaging card verifiable certificate (CVC),
- The optional intermediate CVC,
- The CHUID,
- Biometric information (e.g., fingerprints), and
- The SP 800-73-4 Security Object.

Approved digital signature algorithms are specified in [@FIPS186]. [](#table-piv-signature-algorithms) provides specific requirements for public key algorithms as well as key sizes, hash algorithms, and padding schemes for generating digital signatures for digitally signed information stored on the PIV Card. Agencies are cautioned that generating digital signatures with elliptic curve algorithms may initially limit interoperability.

:::{aside} PQC: Signature Algorithms and OIDs
ML-DSA parameter sets will need be selected and added to the signature algorithm table.
:::

:::{table} Signature algorithm and key size requirements for PIV information
:label: table-piv-signature-algorithms
:align: center

| Timeframe        | Public Key Algorithms and Key Sizes | Hash Algorithms | Padding Scheme |
| ---------------- | ------------------------ | ------------------ | ---------------------- |
| **Through 2030** | RSA (2048, 3072 or 4096) | SHA-256 or SHA-384 | PKCS #1 v1.5           |
|                  | RSA (2048, 3072 or 4096) | SHA-256 or SHA-384 | PSS                    |
|                  | ECDSA (Curve P-256)      | SHA-256            | N/A                    |
|                  | ECDSA (Curve P-384)      | SHA-384            | N/A                    |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| **2031 and Beyond** | RSA (3072 or 4096)    | SHA-256 or SHA-384 | PKCS #1 v1.5           |
|                  | RSA (3072 or 4096)       | SHA-256 or SHA-384 | PSS                    |
|                  | ECDSA (Curve P-256)      | SHA-256            | N/A                    |
|                  | ECDSA (Curve P-384)      | SHA-384            | N/A                    |

:::

RSA signatures may use either the PKCS #1 v1.5 padding scheme or the Probabilistic Signature Scheme (PSS) padding, as specified in [@FIPS186] through reference to [@PKCS1]. The PSS padding scheme object identifier (OID) is independent of the hash algorithm. The hash algorithm is specified as a parameter [@PKCS1].

:::{aside} PQC: CVC Signature Algorithms
The CVC signature requirements currently mandate ECDSA. One or more options using ML-DSA would be needed when PQC cipher suites are defined in SP 800-73 Part 2.
:::

The secure messaging CVC shall be signed using ECDSA (Curve P-256) with SHA-256 if it contains an ECDH (Curve P-256) subject public key and shall be signed using ECDSA (Curve P-384) with SHA-384 otherwise. The Intermediate CVC shall be signed using RSA with SHA-256 and PKCS #1 v1.5 padding.

FIPS 201-3, SP 800-73, and SP 800-76 specify formats for the CHUID, the Security Object, the biometric information, and X.509 public key certificates, which rely on OIDs to specify which signature algorithm was used to generate the digital signature. The object identifiers specified in [](#table-fips201-signature-oids) must be used in FIPS 201-3 implementations to identify the signature algorithm. [^RSAoid] [^chuid_rsa]

[^RSAoid]: The OID for RSA with SHA-1 and PKCS #1 v1.5 padding is included in [](#table-fips201-signature-oids) since applications may encounter X.509 certificates that were signed before January 1, 2011, using this algorithm.

[^chuid_rsa]: For the CHUID, Security Object, and biometric information, the signatureAlgorithm field of SignerInfo shall contain rsaEncryption (1.2.840.113549.1.1.1) when the signature algorithm is RSA with PKCS #1 v1.5 padding.

:::{table} FIPS 201-3 signature algorithm object identifiers
:label: table-fips201-signature-oids
:align: center

| Signature Algorithm | Object Identifier (OID) |
| --- | --- |
| RSA with SHA-1 and PKCS #1 v1.5 padding | sha1WithRSAEncryption ::= {iso(1) member-body(2) us(840) rsadsi(113549) pkcs(1) pkcs-1(1) 5} |
| RSA with SHA-256 and PKCS #1 v1.5 padding | sha256WithRSAEncryption ::= {iso(1) member-body(2) us(840) rsadsi(113549) pkcs(1) pkcs-1(1) 11} |
| RSA with SHA-256 and PSS padding | id-RSASSA-PSS ::= {iso(1) member-body(2) us(840) rsadsi(113549) pkcs(1) pkcs-1(1) 10} |
| RSA with SHA-384 and PKCS #1 v1.5 padding | sha384WithRSAEncryption ::= {iso(1) member-body(2) us(840) rsadsi(113549) pkcs(1) pkcs-1(1) 12} |
| RSA with SHA-384 and PSS padding | id-RSASSA-PSS ::= {iso(1) member-body(2) us(840) rsadsi(113549) pkcs(1) pkcs-1(1) 10} |
| ECDSA with SHA-256 | ecdsa-with-SHA256 ::= {iso(1) member-body(2) us(840) ansi-X9-62(10045) signatures(4) ecdsa-with-SHA2(3) 2} |
| ECDSA with SHA-384 | ecdsa-with-SHA384 ::= {iso(1) member-body(2) us(840) ansi-X9-62(10045) signatures(4) ecdsa-with-SHA2(3) 3} |

:::

#### Specification of Public Keys in X.509 Certificates

FIPS 201-3 requires the generation and storage of an X.509 certificate to correspond with each asymmetric private key contained on the PIV Card, except for the PIV Secure Messaging key. X.509 certificates include object identifiers to specify the cryptographic algorithm associated with a public key. [](#table-piv-public-key-oids) specifies the object identifiers that may be used in certificates to indicate the algorithm for a subject public key.

:::{aside} PQC: Public Key OIDs
ML-DSA and ML-KEM will each need new public key OIDs. Unlike ECC, where a single OID is shared and a curve parameter distinguishes key sizes, each PQC parameter set (e.g., ML-DSA-65 vs. ML-DSA-87) has its own distinct OID.
:::

:::{table} Public key object identifiers for PIV key types
:label: table-piv-public-key-oids
:align: center

| PIV Key Type | Asymmetric Algorithm | Object Identifier (OID) |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **PIV Authentication key, Card Authentication key, digital signature key** | RSA | {iso(1) member-body(2) us(840) rsadsi(113549) pkcs(1) pkcs-1(1) 1} |
|  | ECDSA | {iso(1) member-body(2) us(840) ansi-X9-62(10045) id-publicKeyType(2) 1} |
| **Key management key** | RSA | {iso(1) member-body(2) us(840) rsadsi(113549) pkcs(1) pkcs-1(1) 1} |
|  | ECDH | {iso(1) member-body(2) us(840) ansi-X9-62(10045) id-publicKeyType(2) 1} |

:::

A single object identifier is specified in T[](#table-piv-public-key-oids) for all elliptic curve keys. An additional object identifier must be supplied in a parameters field to indicate the elliptic curve associated with the key.[^RSA-exp]

[^RSA-exp]: RSA exponents are encoded with the modulus in the certificate’s subject public key, so the OID is not affected.

[](#table-ecc-parameter-oids) identifies the named curves and associated OIDs.

:::{table} ECC parameter object identifiers for approved curves
:label: table-ecc-parameter-oids
:align: center

| Asymmetric Algorithm | Object Identifier (OID)                                                               |
| -------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Curve P-256          | ansip256r1 ::= {iso(1) member-body(2) us(840) ansi-X9-62(10045) curves(3) prime(1) 7} |
| Curve P-384          | ansip384r1 ::= {iso(1) identified-organization(3) certicom(132) curve(0) 34}          |

:::

#### Specification of Message Digests in the SP 800-73-4 Security Object

SP 800-73 mandates the inclusion of a Security Object consistent with the Authenticity/Integrity Code defined by the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) in [MRTD]. This object contains message digests of other digital information stored on the PIV Card and is digitally signed. This specification requires that the message digests of digital information be computed using the same hash algorithm used to generate the digital signature on the Security Object. The set of acceptable algorithms is specified in [](#table-piv-signature-algorithms). The Security Object format identifies the hash algorithm used when computing the message digests by including an object identifier. The appropriate object identifiers are identified in [](#table-hash-algorithm-oids).

:::{table} Hash algorithm object identifiers
:label: table-hash-algorithm-oids
:align: center

| Hash Algorithm | Object Identifier (OID) |
| --- | --- |
| SHA-256 | id-sha256 ::= {joint-iso-itu-t(2) country(16) us(840) organization(1) gov(101) csor(3) nistalgorithm(4) hashalgs(2) 1} |
| SHA-384 | id-sha384 ::= {joint-iso-itu-t(2) country(16) us(840) organization(1) gov(101) csor(3) nistalgorithm(4) hashalgs(2) 2} |

:::

(sec-cert-status)=
## Certificate Status Information

:::{aside} PQC: PKI Infrastructure
When PIV certificates transition to ML-DSA signatures, the CRL and OCSP signing infrastructure must also support ML-DSA.
:::

The FIPS 201-3 functional component PIV Card Issuance and Management Subsystem generates and distributes status information for PIV asymmetric keys other than PIV Secure Messaging keys. FIPS 201-2 mandates two formats for certificate status information:

1. X.509 CRLs and
2. OCSP status response messages.

The CRLs and OCSP status responses shall be digitally signed to support authentication and integrity using a key size and hash algorithm that satisfy the requirements for signing PIV information, as specified in [](#table-piv-signature-algorithms), and that are at least as large as the key size and hash algorithm used to sign the certificate.

CRLs and OCSP messages rely on object identifiers to specify which signature algorithm was used to generate the digital signature. The object identifiers specified in [](#table-fips201-signature-oids) must be used in CRLs and OCSP messages to identify the signature algorithm.

(sec-piv-card-admin-keys)=
## PIV Card Application Administration Keys

PIV Cards may support card activation by the card management system to support card personalization and post-issuance card updates. PIV Cards that support card personalization and post-issuance updates perform a challenge-response protocol using a symmetric cryptographic key (i.e., the PIV Card Application Administration Key) to authenticate the card management system. After successful authentication, the card management system can modify information stored on the PIV Card. [](#table-piv-card-application-admin-keys) establishes specific requirements for cryptographic algorithms and key sizes for PIV Card Application Administration Keys.

:::{table} Algorithm and key size requirements for PIV Card Application Administration Keys
:label: table-piv-card-application-admin-keys
:align: center

| Card Expiration Date      | Algorithm                    |
| ------------------------- | ---------------------------- |
| Through December 31, 2030 | 3TDEA (deprecated)           |
|                           | AES-128, AES-192, or AES-256 |
+-----------------------------------------------------------
| After December 31, 2030   | AES-128, AES-192, or AES-256 |

:::

(sec-identifiers-interfaces)=
## Identifiers for PIV Card Interfaces

SP 800-73 defines an application programming interface, the PIV Client Application Programming Interface (Part 3), and a set of mandatory card commands, the PIV Card Application Card Command Interface (Part 2). The command syntaxes for these interfaces identify PIV keys using one-byte key references, and their associated algorithms (or suites of algorithms) are specified using one-byte algorithm identifiers. The same identifiers are used in both interfaces.

[](#sec-key-reference) specifies the key reference values for each of the PIV key types. [](#sec-card-alg-identifiers) defines algorithm identifiers for each cryptographic algorithm supported by this specification. [](#sec-alg-key-identifiers) identifies valid combinations of key reference values and algorithm identifiers.

(sec-key-reference)=
### Key Reference Values

A PIV Card key reference is a one-byte identifier that specifies a cryptographic key according to its PIV Key Type. [](#table-piv-key-references) defines the key reference values used on the PIV interfaces for PIV Key Types.

:::{table} Key references for PIV Key Types
:label: table-piv-key-references
:align: center

| PIV Key Type               | Key Reference Value                                                                                                    |
| -------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| PIV Secure Messaging key   | '04'                                                                                                                   |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Retired key management key | '82', '83', '84', '85', '86', '87', '88', '89', '8A', '8B', '8C', '8D', '8E', '8F', '90', '91', '92', '93', '94', '95' |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| PIV Authentication key     | '9A'                                                                                                                   |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| PIV Card Application Administration Key | '9B'                                                                                                      |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Digital signature key      | '9C'                                                                                                                   |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Key management key         | '9D'                                                                                                                   |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Card Authentication key    | '9E'                                                                                                                   |

:::

(sec-card-alg-identifiers)=
### PIV Card Algorithm Identifiers

A PIV Card algorithm identifier is a one-byte identifier that specifies a cryptographic algorithm and key size or a suite of algorithms and key sizes. For symmetric cryptographic operations, the algorithm identifier also specifies a mode of operation (i.e., ECB). Table 9 lists the algorithm identifiers for the cryptographic algorithms that may be recognized on the PIV interfaces. All other algorithm identifier values are reserved for future use.

Note that 3 Key Triple DES – ECB with identifier '00' and '03' is deprecated and will be removed in the next revision of this document.

Algorithm identifiers '27' and '2E' represent suites of algorithms and key sizes for use with secure messaging and key establishment. Cipher Suite 2 (CS2) is used to establish session keys and for secure messaging when the PIV Secure Messaging key is an ECDH (Curve P-256) key. Cipher Suite 7 (CS7) is used to establish session keys and for secure messaging when the PIV Secure Messaging key is an ECDH (Curve P-384) key. Details of secure messaging, the key establishment protocol, and the algorithms and key sizes for these two cipher suites are specified in SP 800-73-4, Part 2 [@SP800-73].

(sec-alg-key-identifiers)=
### Algorithm Identifiers for PIV Key Types

[](#table-piv-card-keys-keyrefs-algorithms) summarizes the set of algorithms supported for each key reference value.

All cryptographic algorithms employed shall provide at least 112 bits of security strength. Cryptographic keys that will remain in use after 2030 should provide 128 bits of security strength.[^sec_strength]  Federal departments and agencies should consider potential cryptographic key length migrations as part of their moderate to long-term cryptographic transition and modernization plans, including the need to plan and invest for a future migration to post-quantum algorithms. Capital investments for PIV issuance and relying party systems should be selected with an emphasis on ensuring a timely migration to post-quantum algorithms once standards, technologies, and services are available. If a migration to longer cryptographic keys would require significant resources or infrastructure upgrades, federal departments and agencies may elect to defer these improvements until the post-quantum migration. Post-quantum algorithms will be specified in a future revision of this document once foundational standards supporting their use have been adopted.

[^sec_strength]: For detailed guidance on the strength of cryptographic algorithms, see NIST SP 800-57, Recommendation on Key Management – Part 1: General [@SP800-57-1].


:::{aside} PQC: Algorithm Identifiers and Key References
New one-byte algorithm identifier values must be allocated for ML-DSA and ML-KEM variants. These must align across SP 800-78, SP 800-73 Parts 1 and 2, and any other specifications that reference them. New key reference values will also be needed for PQC variants of some key types.
:::

:::{list-table} PIV Card keys: Key references and algorithms
:label: table-piv-card-keys-keyrefs-algorithms
:header-rows: 1
:align: center
:multipage: true

* - PIV Key Type
  - Key Reference Value
  - Algorithm Identifiers Through 2030
  - Algorithm Identifiers After 2030
* - PIV Secure Messaging key
  - '04'
  - '27', '2E'
  - '27', '2E'
* - Retired key management key
  - '82', '83', '84', '85', '86', '87', '88', '89', '8A', '8B', '8C', '8D', '8E', '8F', '90', '91', '92', '93', '94', '95'
  - '05', '06', '07', '11', '14'
  - '05', '06', '07', '11', '14'
* - PIV Authentication key
  - '9A'
  - '05', '07', '11', '14'
  - '05', '11', '14'
* - PIV Card Application Administration Key
  - '9B'
  - '00', '03', '08', '0A', '0C'
  - '08', '0A', '0C'
* - Digital signature key
  - '9C'
  - '05', '07', '11', '14'
  - '05', '11', '14'
* - Key management key
  - '9D'
  - '05', '07', '11', '14'
  - '05', '11', '14'
* - Asymmetric Card Authentication key
  - '9E'
  - '05', '07', '11', '14'
  - '05', '11', '14'
* - Symmetric Card Authentication key (deprecated)
  - '9E'
  - '00', '03', '08', '0A', '0C'
  - '08', '0A', '0C'

:::

(sec-cavp-req)=
## Cryptographic Algorithm Validation Testing Requirements

:::{aside} PQC: Validation Testing
New CAVP validation subsections will be needed for ML-DSA key generation and signature operations, and ML-KEM key generation and encapsulation/decapsulation.
:::

As noted in Section 4.2.2 of [@FIPS201], the PIV Card shall be validated under [@FIPS140] with an overall validation of Level 2 and with Level 3 physical security. The scope of the Cryptographic Module Validation Program (CMVP) validation shall include all cryptographic operations performed over both contact and contactless interfaces. This section [^cavp] describes the Cryptographic Algorithm Validation Program (CAVP) tests that are required for each supported key and algorithm at the time of publication.[^tdea] If any changes are made to the CAVP validation requirements, the changes and the deadlines for conformance with these requirements will be posted on NIST’s Personal Identity Verification Program (NPIVP) web page at https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/nist-personal-identity-verification-program.

[^cavp]: Terms used in this section are from the corresponding algorithm validation list available https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/cryptographic-algorithm-validation-program/validation-search

[^tdea]: TDEA has been removed from this section since [SP 800-131A Revision 2] has deprecated its use through 2023 and disallowed its use after 2023. Consequently, on January 1, 2024, CMVP will move validated TDEA implementations to the FIPS 140-mode non-approved historical validation list.


### PIV Authentication Key

:::{admonition} PIV Authentication key — 2048-bit RSA
:class: note

**Supported private key:** PIV Authentication key  
**Supported algorithm:** 2048-bit RSA  
**Required functionality:** Key Generation and Signature Generation for 2048-bit RSA with public key exponent 65537  
**Minimum CAVP validation requirements**  
- **Key Generation (186-4)**
  - **186-4KEY(gen):** FIPS186-4_Fixed_e (65537) or FIPS186-4_Random_e
  - **PGM:** Any Prime Generation Method
  - **Prerequisites:** DRBG; SHS
- **Signature Generation**
  - **RSASP1 component:** (Mod2048)
:::

:::{admonition} PIV Authentication key — 3072-bit RSA
:class: note

**Supported private key:** PIV Authentication key  
**Supported algorithm:** 3072-bit RSA  
**Required functionality:** Key Generation and Signature Generation for 3072-bit RSA with public key exponent 65537  
**Minimum CAVP validation requirements**  
- **Key Generation (186-4)**
  - **186-4KEY(gen):** FIPS186-4_Fixed_e (65537) or FIPS186-4_Random_e  
  - **PGM:** Any Prime Generation Method  
  - **Prerequisites:** DRBG; SHS  
- **Signature Generation**
  - **RSASP1 component:** (Mod3072)
:::

:::{admonition} PIV Authentication key — ECDSA P-256
:class: note

**Supported private key:** PIV Authentication key  
**Supported algorithm:** ECDSA (Curve P-256)  
**Required functionality:** Key Generation and Signature Generation for Curve P-256  
**Minimum CAVP validation requirements**  
- **Key Generation (186-4)**
  - PKG (Public Key Generation): CURVE(P-256 (ExtraRandomBits and/or TestingCandidates))
  - **Prerequisites:** Prerequisites: DRBG
- **Signature Generation**
  - **ECDSA Signature Generation component:** CURVE(P-256 tested with input length 256 bits)
  - **Prerequisites (if any):** DRBG
:::


:::{admonition} PIV Authentication key — ECDSA P-384
:class: note

**Supported private key:** PIV Authentication key  
**Supported algorithm:** ECDSA (Curve P-384)  
**Required functionality:** Key Generation and Signature Generation for Curve P-384  
**Minimum CAVP validation requirements**  
- **Key Generation (186-4)**
  - PKG (Public Key Generation): CURVE(P-284 (ExtraRandomBits and/or TestingCandidates))
  - **Prerequisites:** Prerequisites: DRBG
- **Signature Generation**
  - **ECDSA Signature Generation component:** CURVE(P-384 tested with input length 384 bits)
  - **Prerequisites (if any):** DRBG
:::

### Asymetric Card Authentication Key

:::{admonition} Asymmetric Card Authentication key — 2048-bit RSA
:class: note

**Supported private key:** Asymmetric Card Authentication key  
**Supported algorithm:** 2048-bit RSA  
**Required functionality:** Signature Generation for 2048-bit RSA  
**Minimum CAVP validation requirements**  
- **Key Generation (if key can be generated on card)**
  - **186-4KEY(gen):** FIPS186-4_Fixed_e (65537) or FIPS186-4_Random_e  
  - **PGM:** Any Prime Generation Method  
  - **Prerequisites:** DRBG; SHS  
- **Signature Generation**
  - **RSASP1 component:** (Mod2048)
:::


:::{admonition} Asymmetric Card Authentication key — 3072-bit RSA
:class: note

**Supported private key:** Asymmetric Card Authentication key  
**Supported algorithm:** 3072-bit RSA  
**Required functionality:** Signature Generation for 3072-bit RSA  
**Minimum CAVP validation requirements**  
- **Key Generation (if key can be generated on card)**
  - **186-4KEY(gen):** FIPS186-4_Fixed_e (65537) or FIPS186-4_Random_e  
  - **PGM:** Any Prime Generation Method  
  - **Prerequisites:** DRBG; SHS  
- **Signature Generation**
  - **RSASP1 component:** (Mod3072)
:::


:::{admonition} Asymmetric Card Authentication key — ECDSA (Curve P-256)
:class: note

**Supported private key:** Asymmetric Card Authentication key  
**Supported algorithm:** ECDSA (Curve P-256)  
**Required functionality:** Signature Generation for Curve P-256  
**Minimum CAVP validation requirements**  
- **Key Generation (if key can be generated on card)**
  - **PKG (Public Key Generation):** CURVE(P-256)  
    (ExtraRandomBits and/or TestingCandidates)  
  - **Prerequisites:** DRBG  
- **Signature Generation**
  - **ECDSA Signature Generation component:**  
    CURVE(P-256 tested with input length 256 bits)  
  - **Prerequisites:** DRBG

:::


:::{admonition} Asymmetric Card Authentication key — ECDSA (Curve P-384)
:class: note

**Supported private key:** Asymmetric Card Authentication key  
**Supported algorithm:** ECDSA (Curve P-384)  
**Required functionality:** Signature Generation for Curve P-384  
**Minimum CAVP validation requirements**  
- **Key Generation (if key can be generated on card)**
  - **PKG (Public Key Generation):** CURVE(P-384)  
    (ExtraRandomBits and/or TestingCandidates)  
  - **Prerequisites:** DRBG  
- **Signature Generation**
  - **ECDSA Signature Generation component:**  
    CURVE(P-384 tested with input length 384 bits)  
  - **Prerequisites:** DRBG

:::

### Symmetric Card Authentication Key

:::{admonition} Symmetric Card Authentication key — AES-128
:class: note

**Supported private key:** Symmetric Card Authentication key  
**Supported algorithm:** AES-128  
**Required functionality:** Encryption and Decryption for AES-128  
**Minimum CAVP validation requirements**  
- **AES Validation**
  - **Mode:** ECB (encrypt/decrypt)
  - **Key size:** 128 bits

:::


:::{admonition} Symmetric Card Authentication key — AES-192
:class: note

**Supported private key:** Symmetric Card Authentication key  
**Supported algorithm:** AES-192  
**Required functionality:** Encryption and Decryption for AES-192  
**Minimum CAVP validation requirements**  
- **AES Validation**
  - **Mode:** ECB (encrypt/decrypt)
  - **Key size:** 192 bits

:::


:::{admonition} Symmetric Card Authentication key — AES-256
:class: note

**Supported private key:** Symmetric Card Authentication key  
**Supported algorithm:** AES-256  
**Required functionality:** Encryption and Decryption for AES-256  
**Minimum CAVP validation requirements**  
- **AES Validation**
  - **Mode:** ECB (encrypt/decrypt)
  - **Key size:** 256 bits

:::

### Digital Signature Key

:::{admonition} Digital signature key — 2048-bit RSA
:class: note

**Supported private key:** Digital signature key  
**Supported algorithm:** 2048-bit RSA  
**Required functionality:** Key Generation and Signature Generation for 2048-bit RSA with public key exponent 65537  
**Minimum CAVP validation requirements**  
- **Key Generation (186-4)**
  - **186-4KEY(gen):** FIPS186-4_Fixed_e (65537) or FIPS186-4_Random_e  
  - **PGM:** Any Prime Generation Method  
  - **Prerequisites:** DRBG; SHS  
- **Signature Generation**
  - **RSASP1 component:** (Mod2048)

:::


:::{admonition} Digital signature key — 3072-bit RSA
:class: note

**Supported private key:** Digital signature key  
**Supported algorithm:** 3072-bit RSA  
**Required functionality:** Key Generation and Signature Generation for 3072-bit RSA with public key exponent 65537  
**Minimum CAVP validation requirements**  
- **Key Generation (186-4)**
  - **186-4KEY(gen):** FIPS186-4_Fixed_e (65537) or FIPS186-4_Random_e  
  - **PGM:** Any Prime Generation Method  
  - **Prerequisites:** DRBG; SHS  
- **Signature Generation**
  - **RSASP1 component:** (Mod3072)

:::


:::{admonition} Digital signature key — ECDSA (Curve P-256)
:class: note

**Supported private key:** Digital signature key  
**Supported algorithm:** ECDSA (Curve P-256)  
**Required functionality:** Key Generation and Signature Generation for Curve P-256  
**Minimum CAVP validation requirements**
- **Key Generation (186-4)**
  - **PKG (Public Key Generation):** CURVE(P-256)  
    (ExtraRandomBits and/or TestingCandidates)  
  - **Prerequisites:** DRBG  
- **Signature Generation**
  - **ECDSA Signature Generation component:**  
    CURVE(P-256 tested with input length 256 bits)  
  - **Prerequisites:** DRBG

:::


:::{admonition} Digital signature key — ECDSA (Curve P-384)
:class: note

**Supported private key:** Digital signature key  
**Supported algorithm:** ECDSA (Curve P-384)  
**Required functionality:** Key Generation and Signature Generation for Curve P-384  
**Minimum CAVP validation requirements**
- **Key Generation (186-4)**
  - **PKG (Public Key Generation):** CURVE(P-384)  
    (ExtraRandomBits and/or TestingCandidates)  
  - **Prerequisites:** DRBG  
- **Signature Generation**
  - **ECDSA Signature Generation component:**  
    CURVE(P-384 tested with input length 384 bits)  
  - **Prerequisites:** DRBG

:::


### Key Management Key

:::{admonition} Key management key — 2048-bit RSA (Key Transport)
:class: note

**Supported private key:** Key management key  
**Supported algorithm:** 2048-bit RSA  
**Required functionality:** 2048-bit RSA Key Transport  
**Minimum CAVP validation requirements**
- **Key Generation (if key can be generated on card)**
  - **186-4KEY(gen):** FIPS186-4_Fixed_e (65537) or FIPS186-4_Random_e  
  - **PGM:** Any Prime Generation Method  
  - **Prerequisites:** DRBG; SHS  
- **Key Transport**
  - **SP 800-56B RSADP component**
:::


:::{admonition} Key management key — 3072-bit RSA (Key Transport)
:class: note

**Supported private key:** Key management key  
**Supported algorithm:** 3072-bit RSA  
**Required functionality:** 3072-bit RSA Key Transport  
**Minimum CAVP validation requirements**
- **Key Generation (if key can be generated on card)**
  - **186-4KEY(gen):** FIPS186-4_Fixed_e (65537) or FIPS186-4_Random_e  
  - **PGM:** Any Prime Generation Method  
  - **Prerequisites:** DRBG; SHS  
- **Key Transport**
  - **SP 800-56B RSADP component**

:::


:::{admonition} Key management key — ECDH (Curve P-256)
:class: note

**Supported private key:** Key management key  
**Supported algorithm:** ECDH (Curve P-256)  
**Required functionality:** Key Agreement for Curve P-256  
**Minimum CAVP validation requirements**
- **Key Generation (if key can be generated on card)**
  - **PKG (Public Key Generation):** CURVE(P-256)  
    (ExtraRandomBits and/or TestingCandidates)  
  - **Prerequisites:** DRBG  
- **Key Agreement**
  - **SP 800-56A Rev. 3 Section 5.7.1.2**  
    ECC CDH primitive component: CURVE(P-256)

:::


:::{admonition} Key management key — ECDH (Curve P-384)
:class: note

**Supported private key:** Key management key  
**Supported algorithm:** ECDH (Curve P-384)  
**Required functionality:** Key Agreement for Curve P-384  
**Minimum CAVP validation requirements**
- **Key Generation (if key can be generated on card)**
  - **PKG (Public Key Generation):** CURVE(P-384)  
    (ExtraRandomBits and/or TestingCandidates)  
  - **Prerequisites:** DRBG  
- **Key Agreement**
  - **SP 800-56A Rev. 3 Section 5.7.1.2**  
    ECC CDH primitive component: CURVE(P-384)

:::

### PIV Card Application Administration Key

:::{admonition} PIV Card Application Administration Key — AES-128
:class: note

**Supported private key:** PIV Card Application Administration Key  
**Supported algorithm:** AES-128  
**Required functionality:** Encryption and Decryption for AES-128  
**Minimum CAVP validation requirements**
- **AES Validation**
  - **Mode:** ECB (encrypt/decrypt)
  - **Key size:** 128 bits

:::


:::{admonition} PIV Card Application Administration Key — AES-192
:class: note

**Supported private key:** PIV Card Application Administration Key  
**Supported algorithm:** AES-192  
**Required functionality:** Encryption and Decryption for AES-192  
**Minimum CAVP validation requirements**
- **AES Validation**
  - **Mode:** ECB (encrypt/decrypt)
  - **Key size:** 192 bits

:::


:::{admonition} PIV Card Application Administration Key — AES-256
:class: note
**Supported private key:** PIV Card Application Administration Key  
**Supported algorithm:** AES-256  
**Required functionality:** Encryption and Decryption for AES-256  
**Minimum CAVP validation requirements**
- **AES Validation**
  - **Mode:** ECB (encrypt/decrypt)
  - **Key size:** 256 bits

:::

### PIV Secure Messaging Key

:::{admonition} PIV Secure Messaging key — Cipher Suite 2 (Curve P-256)
:class: note

**Supported private key:** PIV Secure Messaging key  
**Supported algorithm:** Cipher Suite 2  
**Required functionality:**  
- Key Generation for Curve P-256  
- C(1e, 1s, ECC CDH) with Curve P-256  
- CMAC with AES-128  
- Encryption and Decryption for AES-CBC-128  
**Minimum CAVP validation requirements**
- **Key Generation (of card’s static ECDH key)**
  - **186-4 PKG (Public Key Generation):** CURVE(P-256)  
    (ExtraRandomBits and/or TestingCandidates)  
  - **Prerequisites:** DRBG  
- **ECC Key Agreement**
  - **SCHEME:** OnePassDH  
    - KARole: Responder  
    - KCRole: Provider  
    - KCType: Unilateral  
    - KDF: Concat  
    - EC: P-256 (SHA256 CMAC_AES128)  
  - **Prerequisites:** DRBG; SHS  
- **AES CMAC (Generation/Verification)**
  - **Key size:** 128 bits  
  - **Message length(s):** Min 32 bytes; Max 12,745 bytes  
  - **Tag length(s):** 16 bytes  
- **AES CBC**
  - **Mode:** Encrypt/Decrypt  
  - **Key size:** 128 bits  

:::


:::{admonition} PIV Secure Messaging key — Cipher Suite 7 (Curve P-384)
:class: note
**Supported private key:** PIV Secure Messaging key  
**Supported algorithm:** Cipher Suite 7  
**Required functionality:**  
- Key Generation for Curve P-384  
- C(1e, 1s, ECC CDH) with Curve P-384  
- CMAC with AES-256  
- Encryption and Decryption for AES-CBC-256  
**Minimum CAVP validation requirements**
- **Key Generation (of card’s static ECDH key)**
  - **186-4 PKG (Public Key Generation):** CURVE(P-384)  
    (ExtraRandomBits and/or TestingCandidates)  
  - **Prerequisites:** DRBG  
- **ECC Key Agreement**
  - **SCHEME:** OnePassDH  
    - KARole: Responder  
    - KCRole: Provider  
    - KCType: Unilateral  
    - KDF: Concat  
    - EC: P-384 (SHA384 CMAC_AES256)  
  - **Prerequisites:** DRBG; SHS  
- **AES CMAC (Generation/Verification)**
  - **Key size:** 256 bits  
  - **Message length(s):** Min 32 bytes; Max 12,745 bytes  
  - **Tag length(s):** 16 bytes  
- **AES CBC**
  - **Mode:** Encrypt/Decrypt  
  - **Key size:** 256 bits  

:::

(sec-refs)=
## References {.nonumber}

:::{bibliography}
:::

(sec-abbreviations)=
## List of Symbols, Abbreviations, and Acronyms {.appendix}
:::{abbreviations}

3TDEA
: Three key TDEA (TDEA with Keying Option 1)

AES
: Advanced Encryption Standard

CA
: Certification Authority

CAVP
: Cryptographic Algorithm Validation Program

CBC
: Cipher Block Chaining

CBEFF
: Common Biometric Exchange Formats Framework

CDH
: Cofactor Diffie-Hellman

CHUID
: Card Holder Unique Identifier

CMAC
: Cipher-Based Message Authentication Code

CMVP
: Cryptographic Module Validation Program

CRL
: Certificate Revocation List

CVC
: Card Verifiable Certificate

DES
: Data Encryption Standard

DRBG
: Deterministic Random Bit Generator

ECB
: Electronic Codebook

ECC
: Elliptic Curve Cryptography

ECDH
: Elliptic Curve Diffie-Hellman

ECDSA
: Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm

ICAO
: International Civil Aviation Organization

OCSP
: Online Certificate Status Protocol

OID
: Object Identifier

PIV
: Personal Identity Verification

PKCS
: Public-Key Cryptography Standards

PKI
: Public Key Infrastructure

PSS
: Probabilistic Signature Scheme

RSA
: Rivest-Shamir-Adleman Cryptographic Algorithm

SHA
: Secure Hash Algorithm

SHS
: Secure Hash Standard

TDEA
: Triple Data Encryption Algorithm; Triple DEA
:::


(sec-changelog)=
## Change Log

This appendix is informative and provides an overview of the changes made to SP 800-78 since its initial release.

In August 2007, Revision 1 enhanced alignment with the National Security Agency’s Suite B Cryptography by:

- Reducing the set of elliptic curves approved for use with PIV cards from six curves to two,
- Adding SHA-384 with Curve P-384, and
- Eliminating the largest size of RSA keys (3072 bits) on PIV cards. 

In February 2010, Revision 2 updates included:

- Realigning with the NSA Suite B Cryptographic specification by removing discontinued Elliptic Curve MQV as a key agreement scheme,
- Aligning with FIPS 186-3 by removing RSA 4096 as an algorithm and key size for generating signatures for PIV data objects, and
- Eliminating the redundant cipher block chaining (CBC) mode of encryption for symmetric authentication purposes (challenge and response)

In December 2010, Revision 3 updates included:

- Aligning the set of acceptable RSA public key exponents with FIPS 186-3 and
- Extending the permitted use of SHA-1 after December 31, 2010, when signing revocation information under limited circumstances.

In 2014, Revision 4 updates included:

- Adding algorithm and key size requirements for secure messaging,
- Adding Cryptographic Algorithm Validation Program (CAVP) validation testing requirements, and
- Clarifying that RSA public keys may only have a public exponent of 65537. 

In 2024, Revision 5 updates incorporated the following changes:

- Table 1 reflects additional higher strength keys with at least 128-bit security and suggested sunsets of lower sized keys by 2030 in anticipation of the recommended migration to 128-bit security strength in 2031,
- Accommodation of the Secure Messaging Authentication key,
- Deprecation of the symmetric card authentication key,
- Deprecation of 3TDEA algorithm with identifiers ‘00’ and ‘03’,
- Removal of the retired RNG from CAVP PIV component testing, where applicable, and
- Removal of the retired FIPS 186-2 Key Generation component testing, where applicable.